In Japan,
religious rituals are associated
with each stage of life
and with each season of the year.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we want to keep the cleanliness and unity
of the congregation.
In this regard,
one of the most delicate areas
is the decision on whether to attend
a non-Witness funeral or not.
The first thing we must consider
regarding funerals is not to be involved
in religious rituals and acts of worship
that are condemned by the Bible.
In harmony with the principle
at 2 Corinthians 6:14,
we need to keep completely separate
from pagan acts of worship.
Next, even if we don’t participate
in the worship of other religions,
we need to consider if our decisions
could stumble someone in the congregation.
When we consider the Bible principle
at Luke 17:2,
we do not want our decisions to hinder
the faith of someone in the congregation.
The third point to think about
is our conscience.
We need to seriously think
about the Bible principle
at Galatians 6:5, where it says
that each must “carry his own load.”
This Bible principle
also applies when elders
want to support others.
Of course, those in the congregation
can ask the elders for support
in issues related to funerals.
However, in matters of conscience,
elders cannot force decisions on others.
So it would be wrong
to make some kind of rule
regarding attending non-Witness funerals.
If each person can make
decisions based on Bible principles,
we can have a truly peaceful
and free atmosphere
where each individual’s differing situation
is respected.
This would really contribute
to the unity of the congregation.
And all can maintain a clean conscience
and serve happily before Jehovah.
In my culture,
specifically the Namibian Oshiwambo
culture,
like in many African cultures,
there are many spiritistic customs
related to weddings
that are included in wedding celebrations.
Unfortunately, my family is not in the truth.
So obviously, for Ben and I,
that was one of the main concerns.
They don’t understand our worship of Jehovah,
and they don’t understand
that we apply Bible principles
and not the traditions of men.
We got engaged before the pandemic,
but obviously, now that our wedding
was to be over videoconferencing,
it meant that we didn’t have control
over many things.
We tried to imagine situations
that could stumble our brothers or disrupt
the unity in the congregation.
We had to, in advance,
think of Bible principles
that would apply in our case,
but particularly what we also found helpful
was speaking to a mature elder.
He gave us a principle at Proverbs 14:15.
He told us to be very careful
when people say,
“I will do this” or “I won’t do this”
at your wedding.
Basically, it was up to us to make sure
that the proceedings
or things that happen at our wedding
would be in order and in harmony
with Bible principles.
Another principle that came to mind was
1 Corinthians 10:23.
So obviously, we knew
that we had the right to do many things,
but we were also very conscious
of how our brothers would view our wedding.
We didn’t want anybody to be at our wedding
and feel embarrassed
or even stumbled to be there.
Now looking back at our wedding,
we look back with fond memories.
So applying Bible principles
didn’t restrict our fun.
Also, it contributed to the unity
among our brothers
because all of us
—those present, those who were invited—
were able to enjoy the wedding.
You’re not worried about thinking,
‘Oh, did that thing offend anybody?’
So you’re able to enjoy the day
without any bad memories.